Arachsys init
=============

This is the lightweight BSD-style init and syslog system used in Arachsys
Linux. It includes a number of small utilities, described below.


daemon
------

FreeBSD has included daemon(8) since 5.0-RELEASE in early 2003. This is a
Linux-specific reimplementation which supports the same options as the
FreeBSD version, together with additional features to make it a useful
building-block for simple dependency-based parallel execution during system
boot.

Its basic purpose is to detach from the controlling terminal and execute a
specified command as a background daemon. In common with the original, it
has options to change directory before starting, to lock, write and remove
a pidfile on behalf of the command, to restart the command when it exits,
and to drop privileges to a different user and group before execution.

This version can also start a logger process to send output to syslog and
uses inotify to implement simple dependencies, waiting for specified
filesystem paths to be created before starting the command. (Typically this
is used with pidfiles or unix sockets in /run.)

A simple subset of traditional inetd or tcpserver functionality is also
available: daemon can listen on TCP or unix stream sockets and run the
specified command as a handler for each inbound connection.

Note that the daemon process is intentionally run as a session and process
group leader. On Linux, a session leader without a controlling terminal can
acquire one just by opening a terminal device. Pass the -f flag to disable
this behaviour: daemon will fork twice so it no longer leads the session.


init and reap
-------------

Previous versions of this collection provided a minimal /bin/init, which
launched an /etc/rc.startup script at boot, reaped orphans while waiting for
a signal to shut down, then ran an /etc/rc.shutdown script to gracefully
terminate the system. Finally, /bin/init would call reboot() to halt, reboot
or power-off depending on the signal that was sent.

However, competent shells will always reap adopted children, so this was
unnecessarily complicated. It is sufficient to make /etc/init an executable
script which starts the system exactly as /etc/rc.startup did, sleeps
awaiting a signal to shutdown, then cleanly terminates the system like
/etc/rc.startup, finally executing the stop utility below to reboot the
kernel.

Like the old /bin/init, an /etc/init script could sleep awaiting a signal,
or for a more flexible interface, block reading commands from a /dev/initctl
named pipe.

A demonstration /etc/init is included in the examples/ subdirectory, along
with an example /etc/fstab showing the required pseudo-filesystems and
one-line scripts to trigger poweroff and reboot actions.

Sometimes a completely null init can be useful, such as for PID 1 in a PID
namespace. The reap utility is intended to fill this role: it does nothing
except explicitly ignore SIGCHLD to discard the exit status of adopted
children and prevent them from becoming zombies. You could also exec it at
the end of an /etc/init script if you'd prefer to avoid a long-running
shell process as system init.


kload
-----

This is a command-line wrapper around kexec_file_load(), loading a new
kernel that can be executed later using 'stop kexec' or if the system
panics. If no kernel image, initramfs or command line is given, kload
unloads any pending kexec kernel that was previous loaded.

Systems which use a device tree and do not include this in the kernel
image passed to -k will carry over the current device tree, applying any
required fixups for the command line, initramfs, and memory layout.


landmask
--------

Landlock is a stackable Linux Security Module which allows processes
to restrict their own access to the filesystem and TCP ports. These
restrictions will also be enforced on all subsequently created children,
and there is no way to remove or loosen the security policy once applied.

landmask uses this facility to sandbox another command, masking its access
to the filesystem and TCP networking with exceptions specified by command
line options.

The command can read paths specified with -r PATH, and both read and
write paths specified with -w PATH. If PATH is a directory, the policy
also applies to all paths beneath it. Any path that doesn't match one of
these read-only or read-write rules is denied by default.

In addition, the command can only listen on TCP ports given with -t PORT,
and can only make outbound TCP connections to ports given with -T PORT.
It cannot send signals to processes outside the sandbox, and cannot access
abstract AF_UNIX sockets.


pivot
-----

This is a replacement for pivot_root from util-linux. Run with two
arguments as

  pivot NEW-ROOT PUT-OLD

it simply makes a pivot_root() syscall to move the root filesystem of the
current mount namespace to the directory PUT-OLD and make NEW-ROOT the new
root filesystem.

However, unlike util-linux pivot_root, it can also be run with a single
argument NEW-ROOT, omitting PUT-OLD. In this case, it uses a pivot_root()
call to stack the old and new root filesystems on the same mount point,
then completely detaches the old root filesystem before returning.

Performing the detach operation atomically in a single command is helpful
when constructing secure containers from a script. It eliminates the need
to trust the umount binary within the container.

Despite the extra functionality, pivot is smaller than util-linux pivot_root
and doesn't defile /bin with an ugly command name containing an underscore.


runfg
-----

An anti-backgrounding wrapper in the style of Dan Bernstein's fghack,
this uses the Linux-specific PR_SET_CHILD_SUBREAPER prctl to capture
all descendants of the command it runs. It waits for them to exit before
returning the exit status of the original command. Unlike fghack, it does
not rely on unexpected file descriptors being left open, but as a subreaper
it unavoidably adopts pre-existing children as well as the one it spawns.


seal
----

Linux treats /proc/self/exe and /proc/PID/exe in a strange magic way.
Although stat() sees a symlink to the absolute path of the binary, open()
accesses the binary itself whether or not the symlink can be resolved in
the filesystem namespace of the opening process.

Sometimes when sandboxing processes, this can leak a path to a host binary
from inside an otherwise isolated container. For example, this led to the
CVE-2019-5736 vulnerability in runC 'privileged containers'.

One robust defence against this is to exec such processes from a sealed
memfd rather than directly from the host filesystem. The seal utility
provides an easy way to do this for an arbitrary program. Invoked as

  seal PROG [ARG]...

it locates PROG on the PATH, clones it to a new sealed memfd, then executes
the memfd with the given arguments using fexecve().

The behaviour of the shell and execvp/execlp is mirrored as closely as
possible: PROG must be executable and program names containing '/'
characters are assumed to be a full pathname, bypassing PATH.


stop
----

Since a shell script cannot directly perform the final reboot() system call
at the end of shutdown, the stop utility is provided to do this. This
expects a single argument of 'halt', 'kexec', poweroff', 'reboot' or
'shutdown' to indicate the type of reboot() call required. Run without an
action argument, stop will list the available actions together with a
warning about its lack of gracefulness.


syslog and syslogd
------------------

This little system logger daemon takes a different approach to its
mainstream competitors, more in keeping with the Unix 'toolkit' philosophy.

syslog reads messages as they arrive at /dev/log and /dev/kmsg, printing
them to stdout in a format chosen for ease of handling in a shell-script
read loop.

By default, syslog uses UTC timestamps. Each line of output consists of
eight space-separated fields:

  - process ID of the sender, or 0 for a kernel messsage
  - numeric user ID of the sender, or 0 for a kernel message
  - numeric group ID of the sender, or 0 for a kernel message
  - facility name: daemon, kern, authpriv, etc.
  - numeric log level from 0 (LOG_EMERG) to 7 (LOG_DEBUG)
  - date in the format YYYY-MM-DD
  - time in the 24-hour format HH:MM:SS
  - the log message itself

If TZ is non-empty in the environment, local time is used instead of UTC and
the zone offset in the format +HHMM or -HHMM is appended to the time field.
This resolves any ambiguity with times during daylight saving changes. To
stamp log entries with the default local zone, run with TZ=:/etc/localtime.

When run with the -b option, syslog also prints old messages in the kernel
ring buffer. This is useful for capturing kernel boot messages at system
startup. With the -n option, the output format includes numeric facilities
instead of names.

On glibc systems, syslog(3) sends datagrams to /dev/log with dates in the
time zone of the calling process. On musl systems, these time stamps are
always UTC. The right behaviour should be chosen automatically but can be
explicitly configured at compile time with -DUTCLOG=0 or -DUTCLOG=1.

A simple syslogd script which wraps syslog is installed with it.


uevent, ueventd and ueventwait
------------------------------

The kernel notifies userspace of device creation with uevents sent to
clients listening on a NETLINK_KOBJECT_UEVENT sockets. As they arrive,
'uevent -l 1' lists the uevent properties to stdout in a space-separated
key/value format with a blank line terminating the record. This format is
chosen for easy of handling in a shell-script read loop.

On startup, once uevent is bound to the netlink socket, it emits an
initial blank line which can be used to avoid a race in scripts which
also scan /sys for existing devices.

An example uevent property list for a newly created disk device is

  ACTION add
  DEVPATH /devices/pci0000:00/0000:00:1f.2/ata1/host0/target0:0:0/0:0:0:0/block/sda
  SUBSYSTEM block
  MAJOR 8
  MINOR 0
  DEVNAME sda
  DEVTYPE disk
  SEQNUM 5561

DEVPATH is the path within the sysfs mount for the relevant device, and
DEVNAME (if set) is the path of the kernel-created device node in devtmpfs.
Network interfaces will instead have an INTERFACE property with their name
that was allocated by the kernel.

More generally, uevent can listen on any combination of netlink groups,
specified as a mask argument in 'uevent -l GROUPS'. The kernel reports
uevents on group 1, but groups 2, 4, 8, ... are available for userspace.

Run as 'uevent -b GROUPS', uevent will instead read key/value properties
from stdin, terminated by a blank line, and broadcast them via netlink.

A simple ueventd script to handle uevent output is installed with it, as
cleaner, more flexible replacement for udev. To use this, define bash
functions add(), remove(), change(), etc. (matching the event ACTION types)
in /etc/ueventd.conf, which is sourced by the script on start. The event()
shell function is also called for all events, with the ACTION and DEVPATH in
its first two arguments.

All of the shell functions defined in /etc/ueventd.conf will be called with
the uevent environment list (properties) in an associative array ENV
together with the most commonly accessed properties in the shell variables
ACTION, DEVNAME, DEVPATH, DRIVER, INTERFACE and SUBSYSTEM. SYSPATH is also
set to the absolute path of the device directory, i.e. ${SYSFS}${DEVPATH}
where $SYSFS is typically /sys.

To rebroadcast filtered events to userspace, such as programs linked against
libudev-zero, run ueventd with the -b option and adjust ENV as required in
the handler functions. To completely suppress an event, unset ENV or return
with non-zero status.

The ueventwait script provides a lighter-weight mechanism to wait for
a single device without a persistent ueventd, matching devices against
arguments of the form KEY=PATTERN, where KEY is a property name and PATTERN
is a bash extended-glob pattern to match against its value. It scans /sys
to check if a matching device already exists, awaits one using a uevent
listener if not, and reports the sysfs path of the device to stdout.


Building and installing
-----------------------

Run 'make install' at the top of the source tree to install the scripts
and binaries in /bin. Alternatively, you can set DESTDIR and/or BINDIR to
install in a different location, or strip and copy the compiled binaries
and scripts into the correct place manually.

Arachsys init was developed on GNU/Linux and is unlikely to be portable to
other platforms as it uses a number of Linux-specific facilities. Please
report any problems or bugs to Chris Webb <chris@arachsys.com>.


Copying
-------

Arachsys init was written by Chris Webb <chris@arachsys.com> and is
distributed as Free Software under the terms of the MIT license in COPYING.
